The quantitative analysis of the diagnostic accuracy of renal echogenicity in the assessment of chronic kidney disease
肾脏回声的诊断准确性在慢性肾脏病评估中的定量分析

Objective: Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a prevalent disease worldwide. Ultrasound (US) is the most common medical imaging modality for CKD diagnosis. However, its detailed echogenic diagnostic criterion is unclear. This study aimed to prospectively assess renal echogenic discrimination using the naked eye compared to quantitative renal echogenicity for CKD diagnosis.

目标：（CKD）是世界范围内普遍存在的疾病。超声（US）是用于CKD诊断的最常见的医学影像学检查方法。但是，其详细的回声诊断标准尚不清楚。这项研究旨在通过肉眼与定量肾脏回声诊断CKD的方法进行比较，以评估肾脏回声的辨别力。

Materials and Methods: Patients with nephropathy who attended our hospital between September 2018 and December 2019 were recruited and underwent US examination and serum creatinine assays. US was performed to measure quantitative echogenicity and images were reviewed by five radiologists in terms of echogenic discrimination and diagnosis of CKD. Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was assessed according to serum creatinine, sex, age, and race. All patients were classified into a CKD or non-CKD group based on eGFR. The quantitative echogenicity and eGFR data were used as “golden” references to assess the accuracy of the radiologists’ review of images. Receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curves were drawn to analyze the power of quantitative echogenicity in CKD prediction.

材料和方法：招募2018年9月至2019年12月间在我院就诊的肾病患者，并对其进行超声检查和血清肌酐测定。 US进行了定量回声检查，并由五位放射科医生对回声识别和CKD诊断进行了审查。根据血清肌酐，性别，年龄和种族评估肾小球滤过率（eGFR）。根据eGFR将所有患者分为CKD组或非CKD组。定量的回声性和eGFR数据被用作“黄金”参考，以评估放射科医生对图像的检查准确性。绘制了接收者操作特征（ROC）曲线，以分析定量回声在CKD预测中的作用。

Results: In total, 339 patients (171 in non-CKD group, 168 in CKD group) were enrolled in this study. Overall, reviewer assessment showed relatively low accuracy (42.5%C46.9%) for both echogenicity discrimination and CKD diagnosis. After ROC analysis, echogenicity difference values (EDV) between the right renal cortex and right renal sinus showed an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.838, sensitivity of 68.45%, and specificity of 87.13%. EDVs between the left renal cortex and left renal sinus showed an AUC of 0.805, sensitivity of 70.24%, and specificity of 80.12%, confirming these parameters as optimal indicators of CKD.

结果：共纳入339例患者（非CKD组171例，CKD组168例）。总体而言，审阅者评估显示，回声识别和CKD诊断的准确性相对较低（42.5％C46.9％）。经过ROC分析后，右肾皮质和右肾窦之间的回声差异值（EDV）显示曲线下面积（AUC）为0.838，灵敏度为68.45％，特异性为87.13％。左肾皮质和左肾窦之间的EDV显示AUC为0.805，敏感性为70.24％，特异性为80.12％，证实了这些参数是CKD的最佳指标。

Conclusion: Renal echogenic discrimination using the naked eye is insufficient for CKD diagnosis. The quantitative analysis of renal echogenicity not only provides more objective data, but is also an effective method for CKD prediction.

Keywords: chronic kidney disease; ultrasound; echogenicity; glomerular filtration rate

结论：用肉眼对肾脏的回声识别不足以进行CKD诊断。 肾脏回声的定量分析不仅提供了更多的客观数据，而且还是CKD预测的有效方法。

关键词：慢性肾脏病； 超声波 回声性 肾小球滤过率

Introduction
More than 10% of individuals worldwide suffer from chronic kidney disease (CKD), and the incidence of CKD increased by about 87% between 1990 and 2016 (1, 2). Earlydetection of CKD can prevent progression to end-stage renal disease. Routine clinical staging of CKD is based on measuring serum creatinine to estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) (3-5). However, this method is sometimes unstable because of serum creatinine concentration variations due to dietary intake, physical activity, drugs, and assay technique (4). Thus, it is imperative to explore new cost-effective, noninvasive, radiation-free imaging modalities as complementary or alternative methods of assessing CKD. 
介绍
在1990年至2016年之间，全球超过10％的个体患有慢性肾脏病（CKD），并且CKD的发病率增加了约87％（1、2）。 CKD的早期发现可以预防进展为终末期肾脏疾病。 CKD的常规临床分期基于测量血清肌酐至估计的肾小球滤过率（eGFR）（3-5）。 然而，由于血清肌酐浓度的变化（由于饮食摄入，身体活动，药物和检测技术），这种方法有时会不稳定（4）。 因此，有必要探索新的具有成本效益的，无创的，无辐射的成像方式，作为评估CKD的补充或替代方法。

Ultrasound (US) is the most widely-used medical imaging modality for CKD diagnosis. It is well-known that small kidney with increased echogenicity is the typical US finding that differentiates CKD from other renal diseases. As early as 1988, Platt et al. (6) proposed a sonographic criterion (renal echogenicity greater than the liver) for predicting abnormal renal function, and this criterion provided specific (96%) but insensitive (only 20%) results. Since then, this criterion has been regarded as “an accepted echogenic standard” to guide radiologists in CKD diagnosis. However, the level of renal echogenicity associated with CKD and how to accurately assess renal echogenicity remain unclear. 

There is growing evidence supporting a correlation between renal function (or renal histopathology) and renal echogenicity (7-9). Renal cortical echogenicity is the sonographic parameter that correlates best with renal histopathology. Moreover, renal cortical echogenicity is determined primarily by tubular atrophy and interstitial inflammation (8). The grading of renal echogenicity using semi-quantitative analysis is positively correlated with serum creatinine in CKD (9), and some studies have provided some degree of theoretical basis for quantitative US assessment of CKD. Nowadays, more and more US equipment with corresponding analysis software can quantitatively analyze the echogenicity of the target area, making it possible to quantitatively measure renal echogenicity.

Therefore, the purpose of this study was to investigate the capability of the naked eye of the radiologist in CKD diagnosis based on renal echogenicity compared to the adjacent liver/spleen and to assess the feasibility and capabilities of CKD prediction using quantitative analysis of renal echogenicity. 

超声（超声）是用于CKD诊断的最广泛使用的医学成像方法。众所周知，具有增强回声性的小肾脏是超声典型的发现，可将CKD与其他肾脏疾病区分开。早在1988年，Platt等人。 （6）提出了一种超声检查标准（肾回声大于肝脏）来预测肾功能异常，该标准提供了特异性（96％）但不敏感（仅20％）的结果。从那时起，该标准被视为“公认的回声标准”，以指导放射科医师进行CKD诊断。然而，与CKD相关的肾脏回声性水平以及如何准确评估肾脏回声性仍不清楚。

越来越多的证据支持肾功能（或肾脏组织病理学）与肾脏回声性之间的相关性（7-9）。肾皮质回声性是与肾脏组织病理学最相关的超声检查参数。此外，肾皮质的回声原性主要由肾小管萎缩和间质性炎症决定（8）。使用半定量分析得出的肾脏回声原性的分级与CKD中的血清肌酐呈正相关（9），并且一些研究为超声定量评估CKD提供了一定程度的理论基础。如今，越来越多的带有相应分析软件的超声设备可以对目标区域的回声进行定量分析，从而有可能对肾脏回声进行定量测量。

因此，本研究的目的是研究与邻近的肝脏/脾脏相比，放射科医生的裸眼在基于肾脏回声的CKD诊断中的能力，并通过定量分析肾脏回声的能力来评估CKD预测的可行性和能力。

Materials and Methods
Patients
This prospective study was approved by the ethics committee of our hospital. All subjects provided informed consent for participation. 

Patients who developed nephropathy during hospitalization from September 2018 to December 2019 were recruited. Inclusion criteria were: (1) age ≥18 years, (2) evidence of nephropathy (e.g. proteinuria, abnormal condition on biopsy, elevated serum creatinine or urea nitrogen levels) for ≥3 months, (3) and US examination and serum renal function test results over a period <7 days. Exclusion criteria were: (1) kidney transplantation, post-operation, dialysis, renal tumor, renal cyst, hydronephrosis, nephrolithiasis, unilateral kidney disease, ascites, pregnancy, or liver/spleen diseases detected on US, and (2) severe heart or pulmonary disease meaning breath-holding during US examination was not possible, or poor display of renal US. A total of 339 (210 males/129 females; mean age 50±15 years) patients were included in the final analysis.
材料和方法
受试者
这项前瞻性研究得到了我院伦理委员会的批准。所有受试者均提供知情同意参加。

招募了2018年9月至2019年12月住院期间发生肾病的患者。纳入标准为：（1）年龄≥18岁，（2）肾病的证据（例如蛋白尿，活检异常，血清肌酐或尿素氮水平升高）≥3个月，（3）以及超声检查和血清肾功能小于7天的测试结果。排除标准为：（1）在US上发现肾脏移植，术后，透析，肾肿瘤，肾囊肿，肾积水，肾结石，单侧肾脏疾病，腹水，妊娠或肝/脾疾病，以及（2）严重心脏或肺部疾病，意味着在US检查期间无法屏气，或肾脏US显示不良。最终分析共纳入339位患者（男性210位/女性129位；平均年龄50±15岁）。

Ultrasound examination 
US was performed using the Philips IU22 US system (Philips Medical Systems, Bothell, WA) equipped with a C5-1 transducer by one radiologist with 12 years’ experience in diagnostic kidney US. Patients were placed in the lateral position with renal region exposed, and both kidneys were examined using greyscale US. The probe was fixed to display the largest renal long axis section with suitable proportion on the “Abd renal” mode and minimize artifacts. All images included a portion of the adjacent liver/spleen and the entire kidney. Time gain compensation (TGC) was set at the middle of the adjustment area and “iscan” was used to automatically optimize image quality. “2D” gain from 58% to 61% (usually 60%, the optimal gain for most renal US examinations confirmed in our preliminary clinical investigation involving 50 cases), “focus” at the bottom of the kidney, and “harmonics” were selected. Patients were asked to take a deep inhalation and hold it for 5 seconds. Static images and four video clips (2C3 seconds or 60C100 frames per clip) were acquired and stored for subsequent analyses.

超声波检查
超声是使用具有C5-1换能器的Philips IU22 US系统（菲利普斯医疗系统，华盛顿州博塞尔）进行的，该系统由一位在超声肾脏诊断领域具有12年经验的放射线医师完成。将患者置于侧卧位置，暴露肾脏区域，并使用灰度US检查两个肾脏。固定探针以在“ Abd肾”模式下显示最大的肾脏长轴截面，并具有适当的比例，从而最大程度地减少伪影。所有图像均包括部分相邻的肝脏/脾脏和整个肾脏。在调整区域的中间设置了时间增益补偿（TGC），并使用“ iscan”自动优化了图像质量。 “2D”增益从58％增至61％（通常为60％，这是在我们初步的临床研究中确认的涉及50例病例的大多数肾脏US检查的最佳增益），“聚焦”在肾底部和“谐波”。要求患者进行深呼吸并保持5秒钟。采集了静态图像和四个视频剪辑（每个剪辑2C3秒或60C100帧），并将其存储以进行后续分析。

Image analyses
Video clips were analyzed using Qlab software (Philips Medical Systems, Bothell, WA) to quantitatively measure renal echogenicity. Quantitative analysis was undertaken by the same radiologist to avoid intra-observer variability. Regions of interest (ROI) were drawn as polygons (area >2 cm2) on the upper/mid-renal cortex (or renal parenchyma if the cortex and medulla could not be distinguished), renal sinus, and adjacent liver/spleen parenchyma. Time echo curves were automatically generated, and the echo mean (DeciBel, dB) in the ROIs was measured simultaneously (Figure 1). High-quality curves that were flat and parallel, indicating no respiratory influence, were selected to guarantee accuracy. For each kidney, quantitative  analyses were repeated four times, and the average echo mean of four ROI measurements was used for further analyses. To compare echogenicity differences between ROIs, echogenicity difference values (EDV) were calculated using the following formulae: EDV between liver and right renal cortex (EDV[L-RRC])=echogenicity of liverCechogenicity of right renal cortex EDV between spleen and left renal cortex (EDV[S-LRC])=echogenicity of spleenCechogenicity of left renal cortex EDV between right renal cortex and right renal sinus (EDV[RRC-RRS])=echogenicity of right renal cortexCechogenicity of right renal sinus EDV between left renal cortex and left renal sinus (EDV[LRC-LRS])=echogenicity of left renal cortexCechogenicity of left renal sinus

图像分析
使用Qlab软件（Philips Medical Systems，Bothell，WA）对视频剪辑进行分析，以定量测量肾脏的回声性。由同一位放射科医生进行定量分析，以避免观察者内部差异。在上/中肾皮质（如果不能区分皮质和髓质，则为肾实质），肾窦和邻近的肝/脾实质上以多边形（面积> 2 cm2）绘制感兴趣区域（ROI）。自动生成时间回波曲线，并同时测量ROI中的回波平均值（DeciBel，dB）（图1）。选择了平坦且平行的高质量曲线，表明没有呼吸影响，以保证准确性。对于每个肾脏，将定量分析重复四次，并将四个ROI测量值的平均回波平均值用于进一步分析。为了比较ROI之间的回声性差异，可使用以下公式计算回声性差异值（EDV）：肝与右肾皮质之间的EDV（EDV [L-RRC]）=肝回声性-右肾皮质在脾与左之间的回声性肾皮质（EDV [S-LRC]）=脾的回声性-右肾皮质和右肾窦之间的左肾皮质EDV的回声性（EDV [RRC-RRS]）=右肾皮质的回声性-右肾窦的回声性EDV左肾皮质与左肾窦之间的距离（EDV [LRC-LRS]）=左肾皮质的回声性-左肾窦的回声性

Image review
All US images and video clips were reviewed by five radiologists with 1, 2, 9, 15, and 27 years’ experience in diagnostic kidney US. All radiologists were blinded to patient data and answered the following questions after US review: 1. Was echogenicity of the renal cortex higher than the adjacent liver/spleen? 2. Was CKD suspected based on renal US greyscale features?

CKD stages
CKD stage was defined according to the Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes classification (3). eGFR was computed using the CKD-EPI formula (5). Patients were classified into two groups: CKD (eGFR <60 ml/min/1.73 m2) and non-CKD (eGFR ≥60 ml/min/1.73 m2). 


图片审查
五位放射科医生对超声的所有图像和视频片段进行了审查，这些放射科医生在诊断超声肾脏病方面具有1,2、9、15和27年的经验。所有放射科医生对患者数据均无视，并在超声检查后回答了以下问题：1.肾皮质的回声性是否高于邻近的肝脏/脾脏？ 2.是否根据肾脏的超声灰度特征怀疑了CKD？

CKD阶段
CKD分期根据肾脏疾病改善全球预后分类（3）确定。使用CKD-EPI公式（5）计算eGFR。患者分为两组：CKD（eGFR <60 ml / min / 1.73 m2）和非CKD（eGFR≥60ml / min / 1.73 m2）。

Statistical analyses
Comparison of quantitative echogenicity (bilateral renal cortex, adjacent liver/spleen parenchyma, and EDVs) was performed using a paired-t test. Data of quantitative echogenicity across the five CKD stages were taken as “golden” references to assess the image review accuracy for echogenicity discrimination (whether the echogenicity of the renal cortex/parenchyma was higher than the adjacent liver/spleen), and eGFR (eGFR60 ml/min/1.73 m2 was confirmed as CKD) were taken as “golden” references to assess the image review accuracy for CKD diagnosis based on renal US greyscale features. If radiologist reviews agreed with “golden” references, this was considered correct image interpretation. Bar charts were used to display the accuracy distribution of radiologist review for the five CKD stages and to further assess the distribution characteristics. If a patient’s US images were interpreted accurately by four or more radiologists, this was considered recognizable. The optimal cut-off values for recognizable echogenicity were calculated using receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curves. 

In terms of quantitative echogenicity, box plots were used to display the distribution ranges among the five CKD stages. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was applied for comparison of quantitative echogenicity among the five CKD stages. The correlations between quantitative echogenicity and eGFR were assessed using a Pearson’s correlation test. For further analyses of the predictive power of quantitative echogenicity in discriminating CKD from non-CKD, ROC analysis was performed to determine cut-off value, sensitivity, specificity, and area under curve (AUC). Additionally, pairwise comparison of ROC curves was used to screen for the optimal echogenic indictor in CKD prediction.

Continuous data are expressed as mean±standard deviation and categorical variables are expressed as frequencies and percentages. SPSS software (version 20.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) was used to perform paired t-tests, one-way ANOVA tests, and Pearson’s correlation tests, and to draw bar charts, box plots, etc. MedCalc for Windows (version 11, MedCalc Software, Mariakerke, Belgium) was used to perform ROC analyses. Statistical significance was defined as P<0.05.

统计分析
使用成对t检验比较定量回声性（双侧肾皮质，相邻的肝/脾实质和EDV）。将五个CKD阶段的定量回声数据作为“黄金”参考，以评估图像检查对回声识别的准确性（是否肾皮质/实质的回声高于邻近的肝脏/脾脏）和eGFR（eGFR60 ml /min/1.73 m2确认为CKD）被视为“黄金”参考，以基于肾脏US灰度特征评估CKD诊断的图像复查准确性。如果放射科医生的评论同意“黄金”参考，则认为这是正确的图像解释。条形图用于显示五个CKD阶段的放射科医生评论的准确性分布，并进一步评估分布特征。如果四位或更多位放射科医生准确地解释了患者的超声图像，则可以识别出该图像。使用接收器工作特性（ROC）曲线计算可识别回声的最佳截止值。

在定量回声方面，箱形图用于显示五个CKD阶段之间的分布范围。采用单向方差分析（ANOVA）比较五个CKD阶段之间的定量回声性。定量回声性与eGFR之间的相关性是使用Pearson相关测试评估的。为了进一步分析定量回声性在区分CKD和非CKD中的预测能力，进行了ROC分析，以确定临界值，敏感性，特异性和曲线下面积（AUC）。此外，ROC曲线的成对比较用于筛选CKD预测中的最佳回声指标。

连续数据表示为平均值±标准偏差，分类变量表示为频率和百分比。 使用SPSS软件（版本20.0，SPSS Inc.，超声芝加哥，伊利诺伊州芝加哥）执行配对的t检验，单向ANOVA检验和Pearson相关检验，并绘制条形图，箱形图等。 （版本11，MedCalc Software，Mariakerke，比利时）用于执行ROC分析。 统计学显着性定义为P <0.05。

Results
A total of 339 consecutive patients, with mean time of 1 day (range, 0C4 days) between US examination and serum creatinine assay, were enrolled. Patient characteristics are shown in Table 1. 

The quantitative echogenicity results are presented in Table 2. Compared with the bilateral mid-renal cortex, the bilateral upper renal cortex was measured with lower mean echogenicity (all p<0.05) and greater standard deviation. Moreover, the echogenicity of the bilateral upper renal cortex was more inhomogeneous during ROI drawing. The bilateral lower renal cortex was not measured in nearly half of cases due to gastrointestinal gas-related artifacts. Thus, the echogenicity of the mid-renal cortex, represented as the echogenicity of the renal cortex, was used in subsequent analyses. There were no significant differences in paired comparisons of echogenicity for liver vs. spleen, right renal sinus vs. left renal sinus, and EDV(L-RRC) vs. EDV(S-LRC), while the echogenicity of the right mid-renal cortex was significantly lower than that of the left mid-renal cortex (p<0.001) and the EDV(RRC-RRS) was significantly greater than the EDV(LRC-LRS) (p<0.001). The number of cases with EDV(L-RRC) <0 dB was 270 (79.6%) and the number of cases with EDV(S-LRC) <0 dB was 266 (78.5%).

US images of all 339 patients were reviewed simultaneously by five radiologists. Based on the aforementioned “golden” references, the accuracies the reviews are displayed in Figure 2. Whether for echogenicity discrimination or for CKD diagnosis, there was a clear trend of increasing accuracy from CKD 1 to 5 stage. Moreover, the distributions of accuracy among the five CKD stages were similar. There were markedly lower accuracies in the non-CKD group. Moreover, the reviewer with longer US diagnostic experience did not show higher accuracy, as expected. Although some reviewers showed individual high accuracies of 66.7% for “liver vs. right renal cortex”, 65.5% for “spleen vs. left renal cortex”, and 72.3% for “suspected CKD diagnosis”. Taken together, the accuracy of reviewer results was relatively low (42.5%C46.9%). Regarding “suspected CKD diagnosis”, 182 (53.78%) were misdiagnosed (156 non-CKD and 26 CKD patients). Interestingly, among 26 misdiagnosed cases in the CKD group, 14 (53.8%; 6 of 16 CKD 3 patients, 5 of 6 CKD 4 patients, and 3 of 4 CKD 5 patients) were diagnosed with diabetic nephropathy. 

To ascertain detailed reasons for these phenomena, the quantitative echogenicity of ROIs and EDVs among the five CKD stages were analyzed (Figure 3). All data in each CKD stage were assessed using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test with p>0.05 indicating normal distribution. Further one-way ANOVA analysis revealed significant differences (all p<0.05) in the echogenicity of the bilateral upper/mid-renal cortex and EDVs among the five CKD stages, and no significant difference (p>0.05) for echogenicity of the liver, spleen, and bilateral renal sinus among the five CKD stages. Figure 3 also shows a slight rise for echogenicity of the bilateral renal cortex and a slight decline for EDVs from CKD stage 1 to 5. Furthermore, the Pearson correlation test (Table 3 and Figure 4) illustrates that eGFR was negatively correlated with echogenicity of the bilateral mid-renal cortex and was positively correlated with EDVs (p<0.05).

The numbers of recognizable EDVs ([L-RRC] and [S-LRC]) were 159 (46.9%) and 144 (42.5%), respectively. Based on Figures 2, 3, 4 and Table 3, there was a clear trend of increasing accuracy from CKD 1 to 5 stage with EDVs ([L-RRC] and [S-LRC]) showing positive correlation with eGFR. Therefore, using ROC analysis (Figure 5 and Table 4), the optimal recognizable EDV cut-off values ([L-RRC] and [S-LRC]) were -3.43 dB and -6.13 dB (with AUC=0.798 and 0.808, all p<0.05), respectively. 

Additionally, based on the correlation analysis (Figure 4 and Table 3), the echogenicity of bilateral mid-renal cortex and EDVs were correlated with eGFR and were used in the subsequent analysis. The echogenicity of the bilateral mid-renal cortex and all four EDVs showed relatively high accuracies with AUC 0.691C0.838 (Figure 6 and Table 5). Furthermore, pairwise comparisons of ROC curves (Table 6 and Figure 6) revealed that EDV(RRC-RRS) and EDV(LRC-LRS) were the optimal indicators for CKD prediction, which were significantly better than the echogenicity of bilateral mid-renal cortex, EDV(L-RRC) and EDV(S-LRC) in CKD prediction.
结果
总共纳入339位连续患者，其US检查与血清肌酐测定之间的平均时间为1天（范围为0C4天）。患者特征列于表1。

定量回声的结果列于表2。与双侧中肾皮质相比，双侧上肾皮质的平均回声性较低（均p <0.05），标准偏差较大。此外，在绘制ROI时，双侧上肾皮质的回声性更加不均匀。由于胃肠道气体相关的伪影，在近一半的病例中未测量到双侧下肾皮质。因此，在随后的分析中使用了肾中皮质的回声，即肾皮质的回声。肝脏与脾脏，右肾窦与左肾窦，EDV（L-RRC）与EDV（S-LRC）的回声性成对比较没有显着差异，而右肾中部的回声性皮质明显低于左中肾皮质（p <0.001），而EDV（RRC-RRS）显着大于EDV（LRC-LRS）（p <0.001）。 EDV（L-RRC）<0 dB的病例数为270（79.6％），而EDV（S-LRC）<0 dB的病例数为266（78.5％）。

五名放射科医生同时审查了所有339例患者的超声图像。基于上述“黄金”参考，检查的准确性显示在图2中。无论是对于回声识别还是CKD诊断，从CKD1阶段到5阶段的准确性都有明显的提高趋势。此外，五个CKD阶段之间的准确性分布是相似的。非CKD组的准确率明显较低。此外，具有较长超声诊断经验的审阅者并未显示出更高的准确性。尽管一些评论者显示“肝脏对右肾皮质”的个人准确率高达66.7％，“脾对左肾皮质”的准确率高达65.5％，“可疑CKD诊断”的准确率高达72.3％。两者合计，审阅者结果的准确性相对较低（42.5％C46.9％）。关于“可疑的CKD诊断”，有182例（53.78％）被误诊（156例非CKD患者和26例CKD患者）。有趣的是，在CKD组的26例误诊病例中，有14例（53.8％； 16 CKD 3例中的6例，6 CKD 4例中的5例和4 CKD 5例中的3例）被诊断出患有糖尿病肾病。

为了确定这些现象的详细原因，分析了五个CKD阶段中ROI和EDV的定量回声性（图3）。使用Kolmogorov-Smirnov检验评估每个CKD阶段的所有数据，p> 0.05表示正态分布。进一步的单因素方差分析表明，在五个CKD阶段之间，双侧上/中肾皮质和EDV的回声性存在显着差异（p <0.05），而肝脏的回声性则无显着性差异（p> 0.05），在五个CKD阶段中，有脾脏和双侧肾窦。图3还显示了从CKD第1阶段到第5阶段，双侧肾皮质的回声性略有上升，而EDV则略有下降。此外，Pearson相关性测试（表3和图4）说明eGFR与肾回声的回声性呈负相关。双侧肾中皮质，与EDVs呈正相关（p <0.05）。

可识别的EDV（[L-RRC]和[S-LRC]）的数量分别为159（46.9％）和144（42.5％）。根据图2、3、4和表3，从CKD 1到5级的EDV（[L-RRC]和[S-LRC]）与eGFR呈正相关存在明显的趋势。因此，使用ROC分析（图5和表4），可识别的最佳EDV截止值（[L-RRC]和[S-LRC]）分别为-3.43 dB和-6.13 dB（AUC = 0.798和0.808，所有p <0.05）。

此外，基于相关分析（图4和表3），双侧肾中皮质和EDV的回声性与eGFR相关，并用于后续分析。双侧肾中皮质和所有四个EDV的回声显示相对准确度较高，AUC为0.691C0.838（图6和表5）。此外，ROC曲线的成对比较（表6和图6）显示，EDV（RRC-RRS）和EDV（LRC-LRS）是CKD预测的最佳指标，明显优于双侧中肾皮质的回声性，CKD预测中的EDV（L-RRC）和EDV（S-LRC）。

Discussion 
Traditionally, renal echogenic assessment of CKD has depended on the radiologist’s subjective judgement. This study is the first to use quantitative analysis of renal echogenicity to explore some common issues in CKD assessment. In terms of CKD diagnosis based on renal echogenicity comparisons (Figure 2), similar distributions and increasing accuracy trends among the five CKD stages indicates that echogenicity is one of the most influential factors affecting CKD diagnosis. However, the relatively low total accuracy (42.5%C46.9%) demonstrates that the naked eye is insufficient for both echogenicity discrimination and CKD diagnosis. In terms of the lower accuracies in the non-CKD group, by combining the correlated data in Figure 3 (Image I and J) and Figure 4 (Image C and D), this result may be because the absolute EDV values ([L-RRC] and [S-LRC]) in non-CKD patients were too low to be discriminated by the naked eye. Conversely, higher accuracies in the CKD group contributed to higher absolute EDV values ([L-RRC] and [S-LRC]), while there are other factors affecting accuracy (especially for surprisingly higher accuracy of CKD diagnosis) in CKD patients. Although reviewers were blinded to clinical data, some US features of CKD (size of kidney, thickness of renal parenchymal) can be interpreted from US images, potentially contributing to CKD diagnosis (7, 10-12). The higher the absolute EDV value ([L-RRC] and [S-LRC]), the easier the discrimination by the naked eye (Figures 2, 3, and 4). Therefore, based on data for recognizable and unrecognizable cases, the optimal cut-off values of recognizable EDVs ([L-RRC] and [S-LRC]) by radiologists were -3.43 dB and -6.13 dB. This suggests that the lower the EDV cut-off value ([L-RRC] and [S-LRC]), the easier the discrimination by the naked eye, and a CKD diagnosis is more likely. Surprisingly, the reviewer with the most experience did not show superior accuracy, which further confirms the variability, instability, and inaccuracy of US image review with the naked eye. 

The echogenicity of the bilateral mid-renal cortex and all four EDVs correlated with eGFR, which is consistent with previous reports (8, 9, 13), and these factors were selected as parameters for ROC analysis to assess their predictive power in CKD diagnosis. Their AUC (0.691-0.838) represented a relatively high diagnostic accuracy compared to reviewers (46.3%) (Figure 6 and Table 5). In particular, EDV(RRC-RRS) and EDV(LRC-LRS) with AUCs of 0.838 and 0.805, respectively, sensitivity of 68.45%  and 70.24%, respectively, and specificity of 87.13% and 80.12%, respectively showed satisfactory predictive power. Furthermore, pairwise comparisons of ROC curves (Table 6) demonstrated the power of EDV(RRC-RRS) and EDV(LRC-LRS) as the optimal indicators in CKD prediction. This encouraging finding reminds us to pay more attention to echogenicity of the renal sinus, which is often overlooked. Figure 3 shows that the echogenic range of the renal sinus is relatively stable among the five CKD
stages. Although the echogenic range of the liver/spleen in this study was also stable among the five CKD stages, a substantial proportion of diffused hepatic diseases (fatty liver, hepatic cirrhosis, etc.) detected by US in patients with renal disease will inevitably influence quantitative echogenicity and result in inherent inaccuracies (14-16). Furthermore, the renal sinus is densely interconnected with renal parenchyma. This not only avoids some artifacts from acoustic reflection or attenuation due to no capsule between them, but may also reduce other movement artifacts from respiration because of their synchronous motion. Thus, the renal sinus may be an ideal reference for echogenic contrast with the renal cortex.  

This leads us back to our original question: whether greater renal echogenicity compared to the liver is a sonographic standard in CKD diagnosis. In this study, 270 (79.6%) cases with EDV(L-RRC) <0 dB (right renal cortical echogenicity greater than liver) and 266 (78.5%) cases with EDV(S-LRC) <0 dB (left renal cortical echogenicity greater than spleen) were obviously more than the actual number (168 [49.6%]) of cases with CKD. Additionally, the cut-off values for recognizable EDVs ([L-RRC] and [S-LRC]) were -3.43 dB and -6.13 dB, respectively, and were larger than the EDV cut-off values ([L-RRC] and [S-LRC]; -6.47 dB and -8.43 dB, respectively) (Table 5) for assessing the power of quantitative echogenicity in CKD prediction. It can be inferred that renal echogenicity greater than the liver is a sonographic standard or US image review with the naked eye causes some false-positive CKD diagnoses. Furthermore, the numbers of recognizable EDVs ([L-RRC] and [S-LRC]) were just 159 (46.9%) and 144 (42.5%), respectively. Thus, these two standards seem inaccurate and insufficient for CKD diagnosis. 

Quantitative analysis of renal echogenicity not only provides more objective data. it also generates novel digital methods for accurate assessment of CKD. Recent advances in machine learning and artificial intelligence have enabled automatic extraction of information from US images (such as kidney length), and noninvasive kidney function assessment (17-20). Although renal size or echogenicity alone are poor predictors of CKD (8), we believe that the more dimensional the data, the higher the prediction accuracy. 

There were several limitations to this study. Firstly, it focused only on assessing the feasibility and capabilities of quantitative analysis of renal echogenicity for CKD  prediction. Inherent US deficiencies may have influenced measurement quality. Although US image quality can be improved with operator training and adjustment of US equipment, the accuracy of quantitative measurement is inevitably affected to some  degree. Secondly, because various types of US equipment lack uniform echogenic standards, the results cannot be compared to data from other US equipment. Thus, it is necessary to develop a suitable medical image post-processing technique to standardize US images in the future (21, 22). Finally, there was no further analysis based on different CKD etiologies, and 53.8% of the misdiagnosed cases in the CKD group were diabetic nephropathy, which may result from the special pathological features of diabetic nephropathy (23-26). Further studies are needed to investigate the echogenic differences among different CKD etiologies. 

The results of this study indicate that renal echogenic discrimination with the naked eye  is insufficient for CKD diagnosis. The quantitative analysis of renal echogenicity provides more objective data and is an effective method for CKD prediction.  

讨论区
传统上，肾脏对CKD的回声评估取决于放射科医生的主观判断。这项研究是首次使用肾脏回声的定量分析来探索CKD评估中的一些常见问题。就基于肾脏回声原性比较的CKD诊断而言（图2），五个CKD阶段之间的相似分布和准确性趋势的提高表明，回声原性是影响CKD诊断的最有影响力的因素之一。但是，相对较低的总准确度（42.5％C46.9％）表明，肉眼不足以同时进行回声识别和CKD诊断。就非CKD组中较低的精度而言，通过组合图3（图I和J）和图4（图C和D）中的相关数据，此结果可能是因为绝对EDV值（[L-非CKD患者的RRC]和[S-LRC]）太低，无法用肉眼辨别。相反，CKD组较高的准确性导致较高的绝对EDV值（[L-RRC]和[S-LRC]），而其他一些因素也会影响CKD患者的准确性（尤其是令人惊讶的CKD诊断准确性更高）。尽管审阅者对临床数据不了解，但可以从US图像中解释CKD的某些US特征（肾脏大小，肾实质厚度），可能有助于CKD诊断（7、10-12）。绝对EDV值（[L-RRC]和[S-LRC]）越高，肉眼就越容易分辨（图2、3和4）。因此，基于可识别和不可识别病例的数据，放射线医师可识别的EDV（[L-RRC]和[S-LRC]）的最佳截止值分别为-3.43 dB和-6.13 dB。这表明EDV截止值（[L-RRC]和[S-LRC]）越低，肉眼识别就越容易，并且更可能进行CKD诊断。出乎意料的是，经验最丰富的审稿人并未显示出卓越的准确性，这进一步证实了用裸眼进行超声图像审阅的可变性，不稳定性和不准确性。

双侧肾中皮质和所有四个EDV的回声性均与eGFR相关，这与以前的报道一致（8、9、13），并选择这些因素作为ROC分析的参数，以评估其在CKD诊断中的预测能力。与审阅者（46.3％）相比，他们的AUC（0.691-0.838）表示相对较高的诊断准确性（图6和表5）。特别是，EDV（RRC-RRS）和EDV（LRC-LRS）的AUC分别为0.838和0.805，灵敏度分别为68.45％和70.24％，特异性分别为87.13％和80.12％，显示出令人满意的预测能力。此外，ROC曲线的成对比较（表6）证明了EDV（RRC-RRS）和EDV（LRC-LRS）作为CKD预测的最佳指标的功效。这一令人鼓舞的发现提醒我们要更加注意经常被忽视的肾窦回声性。图3显示，在五个CKD中，肾窦的回声范围相对稳定
阶段。尽管该研究在五个CKD阶段中肝脏/脾脏的回声范围也很稳定，但是US在肾脏疾病患者中检测到的大部分弥漫性肝病（脂肪肝，肝硬化等）将不可避免地影响定量回声并导致固有的误差（14-16）。此外，肾窦与肾实质紧密地相互连接。这不仅避免了由于在它们之间没有囊而导致的一些声音反射或衰减造成的伪影，而且由于它们的同步运动还可以减少呼吸产生的其他运动伪影。因此，肾窦可能是与肾皮质回声对比的理想参考。

这使我们回到了最初的问题：与肝脏相比，更大的肾脏回声性是否是CKD诊断的超声检查标准。在这项研究中，EDV（L-RRC）<0 dB（右肾皮质回声大于肝脏）的270（79.6％）例和EDV（S-LRC）<0 dB（左肾皮质）的266（78.5％）例回声大于脾）明显大于CKD的实际数目（168 [49.6％]）。此外，可识别的EDV的截止值（[L-RRC]和[S-LRC]）分别为-3.43 dB和-6.13 dB，并且大于EDV的截止值（[L-RRC]和[S-LRC]；分别为-6.47 dB和-8.43 dB）（表5）（表5），用于评估CKD预测中定量回声的能力。可以推断，肾脏的回声高于肝脏是超声检查的标准，或者用裸眼进行的US图像检查会导致某些CKD诊断为假阳性。此外，可识别的EDV（[L-RRC]和[S-LRC]）的数量分别仅为159（46.9％）和144（42.5％）。因此，这两个标准对于CKD诊断似乎不准确且不足。

肾脏回声的定量分析不仅提供了更客观的数据。它还产生了用于精确评估CKD的新颖数字方法。机器学习和人工智能的最新进展使得能够从US图像中自动提取信息（例如肾脏长度）和无创肾脏功能评估（17-20）。尽管仅肾脏大小或回声能力不能很好地预测CKD（8），但我们认为数据越维，预测准确性越高。

这项研究有几个局限性。首先，它仅侧重于评估肾脏回声的定量分析用于CKD预测的可行性和能力。超声固有的缺陷可能会影响测量质量。尽管可以通过操作员培训和调整超声设备来提高超声图像质量，但是不可避免地会在一定程度上影响定量测量的准确性。其次，由于各种类型的超声设备缺乏统一的回声标准，因此无法将结果与其他超声设备的数据进行比较。因此，有必要开发一种合适的医学图像后处理技术，以在将来标准化超声图像（21、22）。最后，没有根据不同的CKD病因进行进一步的分析，CKD组53.8％的误诊病例是糖尿病性肾病，可能是由于糖尿病性肾病的特殊病理特征引起的（23-26）。需要进一步的研究来研究不同CKD病因之间的回声差异。

这项研究的结果表明用肉眼对肾脏的回声识别不足以进行CKD诊断。肾脏回声性的定量分析提供了更多客观数据，是预测CKD的有效方法。
